Okay the next one Geolocation API,
that was, as I mentioned,
one of the first capabilities
available on the web.
So the Geolocation API.
How does it work?
Actually it reads user's location,
but how?
Question for you, how do you know
which providers or which methods
do you know that phone or a computer
can use to locate the user on Earth?
>> GPS.
>> GPS, that's the most common one.
>> Radio towers have.
>> Radio towers with cells,
actually, that was used a lot
at the beginning of the let's
say smartphone era but
to locate the user with
cell towers that location
happens server side our server side.
It happens on the carrier server side.
So right now, all if you are here in Frontend
Masters' office in Minneapolis and
your phone is currently connected
to a cell here of your carrier.
It can be anyone, Verizon, T-Mobile, AT&T.
And they know that you're here,
but not your phone,
because your phone,
the only thing that knows is the cell ID.
It knows that you are in X carrier and
what's the cell ID.
What do you do with the cell ID?
It's just an ID.
It's where the tower is, in which
building is the tower, I don't know.
Because I'm not the carrier,
I don't have their database of cells and
addresses, okay?
So that's why originally Apple and
Google they were making
agreements with carriers so
they can share the data with you
via your phone can get it but
that's not a case anymore, so let's
say that today that's not on a phone.
That's not typically how
it's going to locate you.
GPS has to do with receiving
signal from satellites.
It needs four.
There is a process there.
We're not going to get too deep to
that because as web developers,
we don't care too much.
But I do have a question for you.
So if I open any browser,
I will open Canary because I
think I'm not logged in there.
So it's like an empty.
If I'm going to googlemaps.com,
google maps,
will give me here a way to locate myself.
And if I click there,
it's asking me for permission.
So that's the geolocation
permission dialog.
I will say hello, by the way, it's off.
Why?
Because my Mac is not given
permission to Canary.
So I will do that.
I will use my finger privacy of
security blah blah blah blah.
Now I can try again And
it's getting the current location and
at one point I will get a location.
We are there, okay?
And it's even showing me
within the block where I am.
How is that working?
>> That's too precise for IP address.
>> The IP address, the precision of an IP
address is here in the US, the city.
In the rest of the world, the country and
sometimes not even the country
because sometimes providers they
are in different countries in Europe for
example, there the same provider
is in different countries and
they share the IP address ranges.
So then you are in France and it says
that you're in Belgium GPS I'm on a Mac.
Do I have GPS on a Mac?
>> Is it located by Wi-Fi or Bluetooth?
>> By Wi-Fi or Bluetooth.
Let's see Bluetooth.
I can turn off Bluetooth.
And you will see that's not Bluetooth.
And so why?
How Bluetooth will tell me where I am?
Bluetooth is a way that we have
to communicate two devices.
Up to eight actually.
But yeah, unless we have Bluetooth
beacons here in the room that for
some reason Chrome knows where we are,
that's not the case.
But Wi-Fi sounds better.
So in fact, it's Wi-Fi.
How?
In fact the procedure is
actually pretty good, okay?
It's actually pretty good.
So how is that working?
So, I'm going to simplify
this a little bit.
But the idea is that
when you're in a while,
you don't need to be connected to
a Wi-Fi by the way, what's going on?
Is that there is a list of have
Wi-Fis surrounding me. Each Wi-Fi
has a list of information,
not just the Wi-Fi for example,
if I press my option key,
I could get more information about
the-Wi Fi not just the IP address but
be SSID channel the country code noise.
The idea is that the browser is taking
the whole list of Wi-Fi around me,
of access points around me, with all
that metadata of each access point that
you see here,
not just the Wi-Fi that I'm logged in.
That list you send in that list, and you
can include the Starbucks that we have on
the other block, the Wi-Fi from
the Starbucks All that list is going to
a Google server because
I'm using Google Chrome.
And Google says, yeah, that's the Frontend
Masters' office in Minneapolis.
How does Google know that?
Because of two sources.
First, there are cars
that are browsing cities.
With the Street View cars.
They also have a Wi-Fi antenna and
GPS, and
they're scanning all the cities and
they're matching SSIDs from Wi-Fi.
That's the identifier from
access points and GPS locations.
And the second source of data is us
we are collecting information for
Google or
Apple based if you have iOS or Android,
that if there is a new
access point here and
one floor up there if many people
is reporting that new access point,
they will add that access
point to the database.
And that's my computer but
it's not just the computer this
also works for the phone as well.
Your phone is trying Wi-Fi first, why?
Because it's faster and cheaper than GPS,
cheaper in money we pay for use that GPS.
Actually, we pay for using the GPS because
it's managed by the US government,
but we pay, I think it's around
20 cents when you buy a phone.
It's just like a donation to the service.
But I'm not talking about that cost,
I'm talking about battery cost,
because we need to turn on
a radio that needs to get data.
It's a timestamp with metadata from
the satellite and that's costing battery,
so that's why your phone prefers Wi-Fi.
That doesn't mean if you're walking on
the street and you open Google Maps, it's
using Wi-Fi, even if you're not connected
through Wi-Fi, so using your 4G or
5G connection, it's sending the list of
Wi-Fis around you to locate you faster.
That doesn't work if you are driving,
you're driving in the highway and
you're going too fast to actually read
your Wi-Fis around you and know where
you are because when you get that
information, you're probably a mile away.
The API that we are going to
use is provider agnostic,
which means we won't know
if we get the location,
if it's GPS, if it's clone us if it's or
if it's Wi-Fi.
We don't know.
We don't care.
We can't ask for something different.
We just ask the browser
I want the location.
Do wherever you can to give me a location.
You will get some information where
you may infer what's going on.
For example, the data that you
receive will include accuracy.
In that case, you can say, well,
it looks like satellite-based or
looks like we have a problem.
It needs user permission.
We already seen that.
It relies on the browser or
in the operating system service.
So what happens if you have
a phone with no SIM card?
In that case, the only way is to use GPS.
A phone with no SIM card, no data plan,
takes a while to get GPS location.
I remember I once was in India,
so I'm a frequent traveler,
I've been to 73 countries and I remember
the worst experience with GPS was India.
I didn't have a SIM card at
the time when I was there.
It was like ten years ago.
It wasn't easy to get a SIM card and
sometimes GPS was taking 3 or
4 minutes on an iPhone to get
a location on a crowded place.
So it works only in the foreground.
So as a web developer, you cannot read
user's location in the background.
Native apps can do that, not websites.
So that means API is not suitable for
geofencing or beacon base location.
Beacon base location is the proposal
that we have from the chat of
using Bluetooth beacons to
actually detect where we are.
We can use that for
indoor location if you're on the mall, for
example in an airport.
Using those beacons, you can improve the
indoor location or which floor are you?
On which gate are you?
And geofencing is a technique
on apps that will let you
know when the user gets in or
out a geographical area.
So I'm in the city, out of the city.
Well, with web apps,
we cannot do geofencing.
They say there were a couple of proposals,
but
none of those proposals
actually got any mature, okay?
>> This is specifically for GPS all this-
>> This is specific for
the Geolocation API and
the Geolocation API is agnostic so
that means that only in the real world
today is GPS or Wi-Fi Those are the two
options that typically you would have
on a web app to get users' location.
But you cannot ask for one in particular.
There is one option that is kind of that,
but
it's not really saying, I want Wi-Fi, no.